Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I
have a returned guest, Doctor Lydia Moland, he is
a professor of Philosophy at Colby College. Last time
we talked about Hegel Marx, a little bit of
abolitionism and feminism in the 19th century. And today
we're focusing on her book, which is now on
paperback as well. Lidia Mariah Child, a radical American
life. So, Doctor Moland, welcome back to the show.
It's always a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you. Likewise. It's always a pleasure for me
to talk to you as well.
So, first of all, just before we get into
Lydia Child's personal story and her intellectual achievements and
contributions, let me just ask you sort of more
personal question. So what got you interested first in
American evolutionism, particularly from the 19th century?
Yes. Thank you for that question. So, as you
say, I'd spent my whole career doing uh German
philosophy. I wrote a couple books on Hegel wrote
Salmon Schiller and other German idealists. I was very
happy doing that. Um And then after the 2016
election, I had um in the United States, I
had a moment of thinking that I really needed
to change my life in order to react to
the new political reality in my country. And I
started to wonder, um, what women in particular had
done to address moral emergencies in the past. And
I thought, well, I have some expertise in the
19th century. I know my, my way around the
thinkers there, um, and the obvious and I, I
also had the feeling that it would be good
for me as an American citizen to sort of
come home and think about my own country and
its own history where I'd usually been thinking more
about Germany. So I, I just thought what, what
were American women? And I, I thought it would
be interesting to look at women doing with philosophy
in the 19th century to especially to address moral
emergencies in their country. And obviously, the big moral
emergency in the United States in the 19th century
was uh slavery and the civil war in particular.
And so I, I was very naive, but I
had a vague recollection that um women had been
important in the fight against slavery in the 19th
century. So I went to the Harvard Library for
the History of Women, the Schlesinger Library and asked
what they knew about women using philosophy in the
19th century. And they, they didn't have an immediate
answer, but they gave me a box of folders
actually that someone else had asked to see the
day I happened to go and in that box
was a letter from this woman, Lydia Mariah child.
I had never heard of her. I had no
idea who she was, but the letter was so
electrifying to me. It was so um it spoke
to me so immediately it was clearly by one
activist to another. So someone who was trying to
figure out how to address a moral question. Um
AND it, it spoke with such clarity and such
uh wisdom and so philosophically that I thought I
should really look into this person. Um So I
started looking into her. I couldn't believe what I
found. I couldn't believe how accomplished and how well
known and how influential child was in her own
life and that I had never heard of her.
Um And I was so impressed by the way,
she used philosophical thought to tackle the major moral
issues of her time that I just kept thinking
and writing about her. And that's how I ended
up um writing this book.
So tell us now then about her. Who was
she? Exactly.
Yeah. So she was born in 1802 in a
town called Medford Massachusetts, which is just uh is
very near Boston. Uh Her father was a baker.
He had been born um an American citizen um
just after the revolution. Um And, and actually, that's
not true. He had been uh he was a
boy still during the revolution. Anyway. So it had
been a generation which people had gone from being
British citizens to being American citizens. He was very
patriotic, um, as were many people for that reason,
but he had no formal education. He was a
very successful baker but, um, not a, an intellectual.
Uh, HIS wife also had no formal education. Um,
THEY, Lydia Maria child was the youngest of their
Children. Um, THEY had no interest in educating girls.
They had no interest in educating boys either but
their, their son who was just five years older
than Lydia. Um His name was converse. He had
this inexplicable love of books and he was sort
of mentored by the local teacher and the local
minister. Um He loved books so much that the
family doctor finally took his parents aside and said
he's not going to be of any help to
you in um the bakery. So you might as
well send him to Harvard. So they sent him
to Harvard um where he, he later became a
professor at Harvard um in the Divinity School. Anyway,
all of that to say that she didn't have
a uh an extensive education. She went to primary
school but not to, there was no high school
for women like her, but she had a brother
who loved books and loved teaching her um about
the books he was reading. So as a very
young woman sort of 1213 years old, she was
reading Milton she was reading Shakespeare. Um She soon
discovered the novels of Walter Scott and this just
launched her into this world of ideas that she
remained enthusiastic about. Um, HER whole life. Anyway. So
she, she went from being a voracious reader to
being a very early writer. She wrote her first
novel when she was 22 years old. It was
still very unusual for a woman to write a
novel in the United States or anywhere really. Um,
SO she published it pseudonymously or anonymously. She just
said it was by an American and it caused
a kind of, um, sensation, um, slash scandal. It
was about, uh, a native American warrior who married
a European settler, um, which as you can imagine
was, um, was controversial, but it did well enough
that she became a fairly well known author. She
then followed that up by writing another novel by
writing children's fiction by starting to write other nonfiction.
Um, AND that meant that by the time she
was 30 she was something essentially unheard of was
a self sufficient female author in the United States.
And she also published, um, a self help book
that was, it was a kind of combination of,
um, recipes and um, medical advice, housekeeping tips. But
even there, and this is transitioning more to her
thought. It's a very philosophical book. And so far
as she says, very clearly at the beginning, that
what she wants is for Americans to realize that
in order not to reinstate the aristocracy that they
had just fought a war to get rid of
Americans needed to be self sufficient. They needed to
know how to take care of themselves, um how
to make their own soap. Um And, and, and
cure their own diseases. And she really makes clear
that this is a, a kind of political philosophy
embodied in what Americans should be doing. So that
was another thing that way in which I think
she sets up her real philosophical commitments, which become
much clearer. Uh ONCE she encounters the abolitionist movement.
But then when it comes to her personal, her
own intellectual path, she was mostly self taught, right?
She was, and she was, she was very proud
of that and beyond being proud of that. I
think she thought that it had saved her from
some problems that trained intellectuals often encounter in their
moral lives. So this becomes a sort of theme
that she in so far as she knew of
professional philosophers, which she did, she knew um Ralph
Waldo Emerson, New Bronson Alcott, she could see that
their education had sometimes made them very careful, very
conservative, very focused on thinking rather than doing. And
in a way this was more true of Emerson,
um unwilling to engage in the messier of actual
life. So most people, if they know anything about
Emerson and slavery, think of him as a kind
of moral hero who came out very strongly, um,
in favor of John Brown after John Brown's raid
on Harper's ferry, which was meant to instigate, um,
an insurrection among enslaved people. But actually Emerson came
to that very late. He was very tepid about
abolitionism for most of his life. Um, AND child
ascribed to him and others then, um, the sort
of concern that they had let their educations get
in the way of their moral compass. And so
in a way, I think she felt lucky that
she didn't have that kind of um distraction. But
I'll, you know, I'll say too, as a young
person, she engaged with Plato, she engaged with Locke.
Um She had a study group with Margaret Fuller
on Locke and Amanda Stahl. She was very influenced
by Emmanuel Swedenborg who was a philosopher and mystic
in Sweden. Um So she, she had read very
widely and, but yes, she was essentially self taught.
But, but when did she start actually writing on
philosophy? Because if I understood correctly, at least in
her early writing career, she was rattling most uh
she was writing mostly novels, right? But then when
did she, when exactly did she get she go
into philosophical writings, let's say,
yeah, I would say that it really happened once
she discovered abolitionism. So it's, it's really important for
Americans in particular to understand that abolitionism in the
18 thirties. So about the time she was 30
years old, was still a radical position among Americans.
So I think many Americans think that most northerners
especially were against slavery from the beginning. And that's
just not true. Even northerners who were against slavery
were very uncomfortable, usually with the position of abolitionism,
which was the claim that slavery should end immediately,
not gradually and that it should end without compensation
to enslavers. So to, to embrace a position like
that was essentially to become a kind of social
pariah. Um It was to risk ostracism and condemnation
by all of the kind of proper people, you
know, in somewhere like Boston, which was very concerned
with itself as the beacon of intellectual sophistication in
the United States. So child had also, you know,
disliked slavery, but then sort of tepid about, you
know, thinking, well, probably it's going away anyway and
probably it's not as bad as some people make
it sound. But then in 1830 she met a
man named William Lloyd Garrison who was a radical
abolitionist. He was a white man, but he had
moved to Boston to build on the abolitionist community
among black Americans there. And he as a, as
a white author and editor was trying, was looking
for converts for people who he could, who could
help him spread the message of abolitionism. And he
knew that child was a very effective novelist so
that she could reach people emotionally. And he knew
that she was a very effective arguer because she'd
taken a position on on other issues before that.
And she had, she was a household name. She
was known in the north and the south for
her uh literature and for her advice um to
all kinds of people, um including about, you know,
very practical things. So he met with her, he
and, and she describes meeting with him as a
kind of conversion experience where the, as we say,
the scales fell from her eyes and she suddenly
realized that this thing that she hadn't thought about
carefully before um was absolutely true and deserved her
devotion and attention for in all of her efforts.
So at that point, I think she really started
to think philosophically, which is to say to think
about what kinds of arguments would work to change
people's hearts and minds on this question. So in
1833 she published the first book length argument against
slavery in the United States. It was called an
appeal in favor of that class of Americans called
Africans. And to my mind, it's um it's a
deep philosophical work for a couple of reasons. One
is that it asks the big questions, right? So
what is justice? What is humanity, what is truth?
What does it mean? Uh TO think of someone
else as a human being? But also in so
far as, as it's a fire hose of argumentation.
So she takes all of the reasons and excuses
that people had been using people like her people
in the North had been using to excuse their
apathy about slavery and she just takes them down
one by one sometimes in a very socratic style.
So she'll, she'll put up um a kind of
um usual conventional reason for not interfering in the
South, for instance. And then she'll just list all
of the reasons why that is a hypocritical position,
why it's a nonsensical position, why it's intention with
American values, et cetera. So this book had several
chapters. It had a couple of chapters on the
history of slavery, the economics of slavery, the moral
problems with slavery, the intellectual character of Africans and
their descendants, et cetera. And then the last chapter
is aimed squarely at northerners. Um And the first
sentence of it is something like while we bestow
our earnest disapprobation on our brethren in the South,
let us not flatter ourselves that we are any
better than they. This was absolute treason as far
as most people in Boston were concerned to say
that Bostonians were as guilty in the, on the
topic of slavery, as people in the South was
a, was a heresy. Um So she was really
ostracized at that point. Again, I think there are
some interesting parallels to Socrates here, right? So she,
she kind of shows up in the public square,
she asks people kind of basic questions about their
thoughtlessly held beliefs and shows them to be um
deeply hypocritical and uninformed and in the, and captives
of terrible arguments, destroys those arguments and is essentially
that she wasn't killed, but she was, um, was
ostracized and there were times in which her life
was threatened and, you know, it was a, it
was a very dangerous position to take, especially as
a woman. So when, when she had published these
other books, people had been uneasy and should women
really be writing novels and, you know, should they
really be, you know, messing around in these topics?
But for a woman to talk about economics and
politics and history and then to call northerners hypocrites,
I was really beyond the pale. Um So at
that point, then her life really changed. Uh She
lost her income from her books. People stopped buying
her books. Um And she and her husband essentially
lived in poverty for the rest of their lives.
So there's lots more to say about her philosophy.
But I, I would say that is, is one
of the moments that I would say becomes a
kind of philosophical turn for her. She never called
herself a philosopher. In fact, she um resisted being
called that I think in part because she was
afraid of how the people she knew of who
were philosophers, let that get in the way of
their actions. But there, there's no question that she
both used philosophy and that she thought philosophically.
But then when it comes to abolitionism, uh how
influential was she back then in terms of this
movement.
She was very influential, she was very well known.
Um Lots of people wrote to her throughout her
life to tell her that she had changed their
minds and changed their lives. Some of what she
wrote about slavery sold very, very well. Um She
never took money for it, which is part of
why she remained impoverished, but I'll give you one
example. So this is much later in 1859. Um
AFTER John Brown's failed insurrection against slavery in um
in Virginia, she wrote to the governor of Virginia
asking to come and nurse John Brown who was
then in prison, the governor of Virginia. So she
was famous enough that the governor of Virginia wrote
back and said, you know, uh yes, you can
come and visit him. But he took some time
to um scold her right to say that John
Brown's violent raid was the fault of people like
her who had been, you know, saying such extreme
things about slavery um that people like John Brown
became violent about it. He then published her letter
without her permission and his letter um reprimanding her
in the press. This gave her the opportunity to
write back in the press. Um AND it was
this, you know, 57 page I forget um just
destruction of his terrible arguments again that caused another
woman to in in the South to write this
very angry reply to child and publish that in
the newspapers and then that gave child an opportunity
to publish again an even longer rebuttal. I mean,
these are just, she was a master of rhetoric.
Um, AND these people, I don't think they quite
knew what they were getting into when they sort
of baited her into responding. And then that so
all of those letters together were then published as
a pamphlet which sold 300,000 copies, which is an
incredible number for um the population of the United
States at that time. But I think it was
the 19th century equivalent of going viral. Um And
when she died, people were very clear that she
had in many cases each a part of the
population that some of the other um major abolitionist
speakers were unable to reach. So I think during
her lifetime, she was considered very, very influential
by the way, when did she die? Exactly. Did
she leave? At least to see, for example, the
end of the Civil War or
no, she did. So she died in 1880. Um
So she, yeah, the civil war ended in 1865.
So, yes, she, she saw the end of the
war, she saw emancipation. Um She was surprisingly uh
non triumphant about that. Um IN part because she
was so saddened and discouraged by the fact that
it took a war to end slavery. And she
was convinced correctly as it turned out that unless
slavery ended because white Americans actually change their hearts
and minds as opposed to being forced to give
up slavery um through violence that um slavery would
just reassert itself in another form which it very
quickly in the South um around things like black
codes and then later uh Jim Crow laws. And
there, there are many parts of slavery that survive
in the mass incarceration system in the United States
now. Uh NOT to mention just the survival of
racism. So, and she really, she lived long enough
to watch Reconstruction, which was the attempt to rebuild
the South with a more just racial uh framework
to see that fail. So she, I think died
very discouraged about the future of um racial justice
in the United States. And I should say that
the fact that she was interested in racial justice
and racial equality rather than just the end of
slavery also really made her a radical. So there
were lots of northerners who thought that slavery should
end, you know, were sort of slowly convinced that
it should end. But that did not mean that
they thought that Africans and their descendants were the
equals of whites. So they, they maybe thought they
shouldn't be enslaved. Exactly. But they definitely did not
want them in schools, in churches, in theaters. They
didn't, in most cases, didn't want them to be
able to vote, right. So, so the end of
slavery did not mean anything like the beginning of
racial equality, even for most people in the north
and so child from a very early point was
wanted, both. She wanted the end of slavery and
she wanted racial equality. Um And when she died,
it was still very clear to her that, that
was a long way away in the United States
still is.
And she was right, because black people in America
had to fight for equal rights, at least for
the next, the next 100 years.
Right. Yes, that's right. And, and many of those
fights are still not over and in many cases,
things are getting worse rather than better as far
as racial equality goes.
So, uh something that she also was, was a
women's rights activist, right? So, what would you like
to tell us about that? What were some of
her main ideas and contributions in that domain?
Yeah, I think this is a really interesting part
of her um, trajectory. She was much slower to
embrace gender equality as we now call it uh
than she was to embrace racial equality. So she,
I, I think that was in part because as
she herself said, she was much more comfortable fighting
for the rights of other people than for her
own. So she would say things like I don't,
I would rather never talk about women's rights. I
would rather just go out and do what I
want to do. And, you know, if people don't
want me to do it, then I will fight
with them. But not until then. And I think
at the beginning, she also sort of took the
line that women had their own sphere and it
was better for them not to get involved in,
in some parts of society in the 18 thirties.
She got very mixed up in a huge scandal
and schism in the abolitionist movement when some men.
Well, what happened was it was started by people
like William Lloyd Garrison who were radical in many
ways including Garrison believed in gender equality or equality
of the sexes. But then as the movement grew
and more conservative men wanted to join, they were
very uncomfortable with the fact that Garrison had quote
unquote, allowed women to join. And more to the
point that women abolitionists were speaking in public, which
was still essentially forbidden. Child herself never spoke in
public as far as I know she didn't like
doing it. She didn't want to do it but
sh but she wanted her female collaborators like Abby
Kelly or the Grimke sisters or Maria Weston Chapman,
um to be allowed to speak if they wanted
to. And so when the more conservative men started
to say things like we will join this movement,
but only if the women stop speaking and essentially
go home, then she fought back um and wrote
incredibly eloquent things about um not just the equality
of men and women, but about what it means
to allow individuals to do what their consciences dictate.
So her, her main point of argument against men
at that point was more, don't you dare get
in the way of my doing what I feel
called to do morally speaking. Um And you know,
gender is like, not even, doesn't even have to
be part of that unless you, the more conservative
men make it a part of that. So, so
her sense was that the, the fight about women's
involvement in the abolitionist movement was really the fault
of men. So sometimes men would say, well, please
just don't bring up the women question that's distracting.
And she would say I didn't bring it up,
you brought it up, right? We were just doing
what we thought we should be doing and then
suddenly we're told we shouldn't. And then as is
so typical in the history of philosophy, women have
to stop doing what they wanted to do. In
many cases, philosophies and fight for their right to
do that first, which means that they have much
less time to develop their philosophies or just to
do. And it just becomes an enormous distraction that
the men don't have to deal with. So this,
this is a classic problem anyway. Um So later
in her life after the war was over, she
did get very involved in the um fight for
women's suffrage for the right to vote. Um She
was older at that point, she didn't, she wasn't
as involved as she had been in abolition, but
she did write a very powerful series of articles
in the Independent. Um Again, it is a very
philosophical way just destroying all of the arguments that
people were making to keep women from voting. Um
So that, that there's also amazing philosophical thinking going
on there. I'll mention one other thing that was
very painful for her around this topic, which was
that um your, your listeners and viewers might know
that in the United States after the war, the
13th amendment ended slavery, but n no Africans or
their descendants could vote yet on the federal level.
Like there was no federal guarantee of that. It
varied by state. But um when the 15th amendment
was proposed to allow black men the right to
vote. Some feminists like Elizabeth Katie Stanton and Susan
B. Anthony started to oppose it because it was
going to keep women from voting. So the language
of the 15th amendment ended up introducing the idea
that only men could vote with that. That hadn't
been in the constitution previously. Um So for child,
that was so painful to watch the women's movement
then splinter between those who oppose the 15th amendment
because it was bad for women and those who
said it is bad for women, but black men
desperately need the right to vote if Reconstruction is
going to continue in the South. So we should
support it anyway. Child was definitely in the latter
camp. So she you know, she said she wished
that the 15th amendment didn't specify men. Um, BUT
she supported it, um, for the sake of black
male voters. Um, BUT that, this is another example
of how the, the quote unquote woman question, um,
became a real issue for people who were trying
to fight for racial justice, um, as well.
Mhm. No. Yeah. I mean, in the history of
universal suffrage there's always this trend of first, uh,
we introduce vote, uh, the voting rights to, I
mean, in certain places, people who own land themselves,
which, uh, were men for the most part. But
then we expand to the best of the males,
but perhaps not the blacks and then perhaps also
the blacks and then perhaps also women. So, I
mean, it's always tiny steps but that's almost, uh,
it, it's the same, almost everywhere across the world.
So it's not a problem that was specific to
the United States, unfortunately. So, but, uh, we were
talking about abolitionism and women's rights. Uh, IN her
work in, uh Lydia, child's work did her ideas
on abolitionism intersect in any way with her ideas
on women's rights or not.
Yeah, I think they did. And so far as
she, she did believe in a kind of, um,
universal justice that would, um, come to include everyone.
So there, there's a real sense in her work.
I think that people are basically good. They're, they're
e, they're equal for sure. As individuals. Um And
they're also basically good and what keeps us from
being good to each other are bad arguments that
we, you know, hear and then repeat as excuses
not to be the kind of um people that
we should be. So I think she sometimes abolitionists
of this period are accused of being kind of
one issue fanatics and she really wasn't. And, and
that's not fair to say about many of them
too. But she really thought that in order to
address these problems of inequality and prejudice more generally,
you had to articulate something more broad truth about
love in some cases. Uh So that was something
that she talked about from Swedenborg as well. That
is a kind of universal force of love that
unites us and makes us equal that um if
we again let these bad, got these bad arguments
out of the way we would be more able
to um let that shine through as it were.
So, yeah, I think for her, it was not
a matter of, you know, this issue and then
that issue but trying to reorient people around um
a more universal understanding of humans as equal and
love as a greater force that would then solve
many of these problems as opposed to one after
the other.
Mhm. So, and because also, unfortunately in the US,
there's never been a lack of oppressed peoples. Uh
What about the native Americans? Did she also write
on their right on them and their rights or
not.
Yeah. In fact, this was the first cause that
she felt very passionately about. So as I mentioned,
her first novel had to do with um a
native American warrior, marrying a European settler novel ends
um with it's very complicated. But um but with
that Native American warrior giving up his right as
it were to this woman and ceding it to
a European who had a prior claim on her
and then just kind of disappearing into the forest
literally. And for c this was very radical at
this time because most people around child would have
been arguing that the only way to for European
settlers to be victorious, which was clearly the point
was to exterminate the indigenous population. And she was
trying to make the argument through this novel that
they, that force wasn't necessary, that violence wasn't necessary
that because at that point, she still believed um
that European civilization was superior, that Native Americans would
just sort of fade away and it didn't require
killing them. So this is not much better right
to say that um don't worry, they will just
sort of voluntarily cede their position. She really came
to reject that fairly early on in part because
the man that she married um David Lee child
was a, a staunch defender of Native American rights,
including the rights of Native Americans to defend themselves
with violence if necessary. And it was necessary um
against European settlers. So she wrote fairly early on
a scathing book about uh European atrocities against indigenous
Americans. And again, it's just one thing after another.
Um HOW hypocritical this is how cruel this is.
And these people call themselves Christians and they claim
to be followers of Jesus. And how, you know,
how can they sleep at night? Essentially is the
the undertone. So that, that was really one of
her earliest moral convictions that what was happening to
the native population in the United States was an
atrocity. Um A genocide. She didn't use that word.
Um But, and a terrible stain on the conscience
of the country. And then after the civil war,
she returned to that theme and wrote um a
very powerful piece. Um IT'S called Appeal for the
Indians, which is not a word that we use
to describe indigenous people anymore. But it's, it's very
similar to the appeal that she wrote in favor
of that class of Americans called Africans. Um In
that it, it again, it is, it, it may
tears down all kinds of bad arguments, articulates this
philosophy of um integrity. If Americans want actually to
claim to embrace these ideals of justice and equality,
they cannot continue behaving this way if they do.
Um YOU know that they're being hypocritical and, and
delusional and in many cases, not they know exactly
what they're doing. But I, I will say one
other thing that I tend to think about a
lot when I think about that piece is that
she still had and and this was true sometimes
of her interactions with Black Americans as well. This
kind of assumption that eventually these cultures would assimilate
to European culture. She was very clear that European
culture was deeply flawed and that in many ways
delusional about its superiority. But she nevertheless continued often
as did many people to make arguments like native
Americans are like our younger siblings. They just haven't
grown up yet. And once they are exposed to
our um culture, they will be like us. Now
again, that was radically progressive for her time because
many people were saying that Native Americans were not
capable of that and just were, you know, violent
and savage and needed to be um exterminated. Uh
And she completely rejected that. But on the other
hand, um did suggest that part of the kind
of progress of history was going to be the
assimilation of native people to European culture. I should
say that one of the points that she makes
over and over again is the hypocrisy of calling
native Americans. In this case, um savages or barbarous
when what was happening was that European settlers were
acting with horrendous violence and barbarism against them. So,
so she's very clear that European culture as then
absorbed by uh Americans um was the violent one
and the one that needed to be called out
for its savage behavior but nevertheless, I think she
held out this kind of ideal that, you know,
European culture, if we actually followed it as opposed
to not following it by engaging in these atrocities.
Um WAS the one and I mean, in her
mind, the one that had articulated the kinds of
truths about equality and justice that she wanted people
to follow again, a naive position in many ways,
but, but progressive for its time.
So just earlier, I asked you if you saw
any intersections between her work on abolitionism and her
work on women's rights more broadly. Do you see
common threads across all of her uh intellectual, nonfictional
work on the rights of all of these different
kinds of people like the Black Americans, the native,
the native Americans and women?
Yeah, I think so. Again, generally the claim that
all humans are have a kind of equality in
so far as we're, there's a kind of conscience
sense even about dignity and the inviolability of the
person. And then the sense that that humans, once
they have power are very good at making up
arguments to deny that. And in so far as
she has a more pessimistic view of human nature,
I think that would be it. So, on the
one hand, all humans have this potential for um
for great achievement and, and love for each other,
but we're very distractible by bad arguments and that
always if there are these parts of the population
whether it be women or Native Americans or Black
Americans who can be described by those in power
in false and derogatory ways. It's always going to
be in the interest of the powerful to promote
those stories in a way to keep them in
power. Um So I think that sort of those,
those different strands between beliefs about human nature on
the good hand, on the one hand and uh
not on the other would be another sort of
basic philosophical commitment. I think.
So, how would you classify Lydia Mariah child as
an intellectual? Because earlier, if I remember correctly, at
a certain point, you said that she herself didn't
refer to herself or talk about herself as a
philosopher. And you also mentioned that she had some
criticisms of common or traditional intellectuals. Uh So, uh
I mean, in your mind, how would you classify
her as an intellectual?
Yeah, I, I think of her as someone who
thought philosophically who, but who was primarily interested in
philosophical thinking in order to decide how to live
and in a way that is how Western philosophy
got started, right? That is what Socrates said that,
you know, we the unexamined life is not worth
living and the point of philosophy is to be
better people. And I think philosophy often gets so
distracted from that, right? And the, the, the more
abstract and intellectual it becomes the more disengaged from
those real questions about how thought can help us
live better lives and we just lose sight of
that. So this is a, an ongoing question whenever
you try to deal with women in the 19th
century who are thinking philosophically. And I'm, I'm actually
editing a volume of about women um in the
United States and the, and Great Britain um who
were either philosophers or thought philosophically in the 19th
century. And I mean, it, it, it becomes a
kind of self defeating question in a way if
you're always trying to decide, well, were they philosophers
or were they not philosophers? They, they weren't allowed
to be philosophers? They weren't allowed to get university
degrees until very late in the century. So that's
the wrong question um That, that people sometimes ask.
Um But I also think that for, for the
sorts of reasons we talked about a, a while
ago, often women couldn't just think philosophically abstract, aly,
abstractly without first making the argument that they were
allowed to. And so then they had to engage
in what we might call social philosophy or social
activism, which then gives people more of an excuse
to dismiss them, right? And say, well, that's not
really philosophy, that's social theory or that's activism. Um
So part of what I and and others who
are working in this field are, are really trying
to do is push back against that. In part
by showing that in the 19th century, it was
much more common for people to think of philosophy
in those terms. So the the abstract ratified Ivory
Tower kind of philosophy has not always been the
way philosophy has been understood. And so for, if
we're constantly judging people in the past by that
standard, that's not historically accurate. And it's also not
just, and I think that, you know, for me,
I love doing abstract philosophy, as I say, I,
I loved writing on Hagel. Um I hope to
continue doing it. It's also, and, and Hagel has
like such a deep and wide and brilliant and
ingenious system in which so much, there's so much
richness and so much um potential for this glorious
thought. It's also true that he got some very
basic moral things, very wrong, right? So anything about
gender, anything about race, he tends to get terribly
wrong. So on the one hand, we can think
about people like Hegel as paradigmatic philosophers. I wanna
be sure that we don't therefore ignore the fact
that it's important to pay attention to people who
are getting the moral questions, right? Even if they
don't have the big historical system, philosophical systems. And
again, back to an early point, maybe even because
of that, right? You know, the child is not
engaging in this kind of big system building and
in a way that's a reflection of her clear
moral compass. So this is a very long um
answer to your question, how I would characterize her
as an intellectual you know, I'd say she's someone
who, who was a social activist in a way
that was founded in philosophical thinking. And that used
philosophy in the, in a classic original Socratic sense,
both to try to help other people see the
errors in their thoughts and also to live a
worthwhile life that reflects the kinds of values that
we profess to have. Um So she might be
unclassifiable in that um in that way. But that's,
those are the terms in which I, I think
of her.
And as far as we could identify her as
a philosopher, what questions do we think that she
forces us to ask ourselves?
I, I think so many of them have to
do with integrity and hypocrisy. And so what are
our values? And are we living up to them?
So, in what ways do we allow ourselves to
be distracted by bad arguments from the kinds of
things that we know we should be paying more
attention to or the sorts of things that we
know are wrong? Um, I mean, I think she,
again, she's so good at appealing to our better
natures in a way that is, can be really
inspiring. And also to just to ask us to
think whenever, whenever we feel convicted that something's wrong
and then get sort of distracted by thinking, well,
maybe we can't do anything about it or maybe
it's not as bad as it looks or we
find some argument that makes us feel less guilty.
Um That, that is something that we need to
be careful about. Um, AND more honest with ourselves
about
and specifically, do you think that ship reps puts
into perspective, what the role of intellectual should be?
Particularly you yourself, you are an academic and sometimes
academics get very mad, get annoyed by, I don't
know, political activists and they don't like for people
to try to uh moralize what they're doing or
to try to push them into politics, political activism,
moral questions or moral considerations that might derive from
the kind of work they're doing it, they try
to reduce everything into the pursuit of truth with
a capital t or something like that and be
very abstract. So do you think that perhaps uh
Lydia Child would also put that a little bit
into perspective or not?
Yeah, definitely. Um And you know, I don't want
to cast aspersions on, on anyone but, but she's
definitely changed the way I think of myself in
the world and think of myself as an academic.
Um She's the kind of person, once you've read
enough of her, it's very hard to live your
life the same way again. And I, I think
it's important to be open to the concern that
some of us who think we are living good
lives um are actually contributing to the problems that
we say we want to address in really fundamental
ways. So I've tried very hard to reorient myself
in, in lots of ways, the way I teach
what I teach, what I write, how I write,
how I spend my money. I'm, I'm still absolutely
nothing like the kind of activist she was, I
don't flatter myself, um, that I uh do that.
But I, you know, I think especially that we're
facing multiple crises in our world um from environmental
to political. Um And I think academics need to
be very careful about thinking about the value of
what we do. I'm not saying that abstract thought
doesn't have any value, but I do think that
someone like child can help us worry about that
more and try to uh use the intellectual tools
that we have actually to try to make a
better world. And again, I, I understand that there
will be people who say that's not my job
to which I would say well, OK, but let's
be clear about that. Um And maybe let me
one other way of putting this is that one
thing I really admire about child. She was very
good at looking at what her skills and talents
and gifts were and then applying those in a
way that would have real effects. So she knew
she was a good writer. She knew that she
was very good at um convincing people of things.
She was good at practice and, and she used
those things in the service of um the causes
that she knew were the important causes of her
day. And I think even people who don't think
of engaged philosophy as their job can still do
things like that. So part of what I think
she shows us is that everyone has ways in
which they can engage more fully. Um And that
we especially as academics need to be careful not
to hide too much behind some sort of belief
that what we do is so important or so
impressive that, uh, the real world isn't our concern.
And also, of course, in this question, just to
be clear, I was not trying to imply that
there's not, and there's an, there's not anything at
all, uh, about the idea that perhaps we should
keep, uh, morals and politics out of intellectual pursuits
because I, I mean, there's something to that. It's
just that I think that perhaps it's a bit
naive for some academics to perhaps think that what
they're doing is not at all, uh, moral or
political or doesn't have any sort of those kinds
of, uh, implications because it has and also that
it is completely, or talkers in the space that
is completely outside of the cultural, political, economic, moral
context where they live in. Right.
Yes. No, that's very well put. Yeah, I think
those, those are all things that we always need
to be thinking about, but in the current moment,
probably more than ever.
Yeah. So let me just ask you one last
question then. So you wrote of course, an entire
book on Lydia Mariah Child. So what would you
say are perhaps some of her traits or some
of her intellectual achievements that you admire the most
about her? I I mean, actually, is it the
intellectual achievements her, her writings, is it some of
her own personal traits or is it even also
because she was a wo a woman in the
19th century? And we all know that even nowadays,
but even more so in the 19th century, uh,
woman intellectual, I mean, it was a very hard
thing to pull through, I
guess. Yeah, all of those things for sure. Um
You know, that, as I've been saying, like the
power of her thought, the consistency of her thought
over decades. So when she converted to abolitionism in
the 18 thirties, I think a lot of abolitionists
thought that this would go pretty quickly that it,
once they made this very strong moral argument to
the American public, the American public would think. Oh,
wait, you're right. This is terrible. We have to
stop this. Um, BUT instead it took 30 years
and, you know, 750,000 deaths in the civil, like,
just, just an incredible amount of blood um, and
violence to, to end it. But, but she, she,
she remained committed all the way through to the
end of her life. I, I really admire that.
I also really admire that. She never thought of
herself as too good to be practically engaged. And
I think this um is connected to your last
question as well. So I haven't even talked about
all of the ways in which she actually sometimes
physically put her self in this struggle. So she
would sometimes go to um speeches that were being
given by abolitionist speakers at which there were mobs
that attacked them and she would put herself between
the speaker and the mob assuming correctly that the
mob was less likely to attack a woman. So
she, she would, she would be physically engaged. She
and her husband moved to the middle of Massachusetts
to try farming sugar beets at one point in
an attempt to undermine the plantation, sugarcane trade. So
that was another example in which she like completely
changed where she lived and what she was doing
thought in a very thought economically and agriculturally instead
of philosophically or in addition to philosophically. And also
she was very clear in her engagement with Black
Americans um and in trying to support them and
make sure that their voices were heard um in
some cases helping them financially or she did help
people on the underground railroad. So, so she was
also willing really to engage on a more practical,
less intellectual level. She also during the civil war
and sewed for soldiers and raised money for fugitives
from slavery. I mean, she, she was always thinking
what she could do to help actual people as
well as articulating in, in more abstract ways, the
kinds of arguments that she also thought were necessary.
So it's a kind of um again engaged philosophy
and how do I put my thoughts into action
um that, yeah, I I really admire about her.
Great. So the book is again, Lydia Mariah Child,
a radical American life. Of course, I'm leaving a
link to it in the description of the interview
and also a link to our first interview here
on the channel, Doctor Moland. And apart from that,
would you like to tell people again where they
can find you and your work on the internet?
Yes, thank you. So, um I my website is
Lydia moen.com. Um I am on X and Threads
um Occasionally anyway, um the book, as you mentioned
is out in paperback very soon and there is
also now an audio book that's on audible and,
and many other places where people get their audio
books. So I think um this is going to
be another time where it'll be really interesting to
engage in, in her thought and I would love
to hear people's thoughts about her if they read
the book.
Great. So, thank you so much again for coming
back on the show. It's always a big pleasure
to talk
with you. My pleasure. Thank you again, so much
for your wonderful questions.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it. Please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno,
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall, her
ma J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel S friends,
David Sloan Wilson, Yaar, Roman Roach Diego and Jan
Punter Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba Adam hunt Pavlo
Stassi. Na Me, Gary G Almansa Zal Ari and
Y Polton John Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden
Broner Douglas Fry Franka La Gilon Cortez or Solis
Scott Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio,
Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Oin
David Williams Di Costa, Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey Junior,
Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey then Spur by Robert
Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick Mark
Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson,
Benjamin Gilbert Jessica Week in the B brand Nicholas
Carlson Ismael Bensley Man George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perlis,
Kate Von Goler, Alexander Albert Liam Dan Biar Masoud
Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings
David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos
Net. A special thanks to my producers is our
web, Jim Frank Luca Stein, Tom Ween, Bernard N
Cortes Dixon, Bendik, Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden.
And to my executive producers, Matthew lavender, Si Adrian
Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.